<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>XI</h3>
			<h4>The Bishop</h4>
			<p>Mr.¬ÝPeacocke had been quite right in saying that the secret would at once be known through the whole diocese. It certainly was so before he had been gone a week, and it certainly was the case also that the diocese generally did not approve of the Doctor‚Äôs conduct. The woman ought not to have been left there. So said the diocese. It was of course the case, that though the diocese knew much, it did not know all. It is impossible to keep such a story concealed, but it is quite as impossible to make known all its details. In the eyes of the diocese the woman was of course the chief sinner, and the chief sinner was allowed to remain at the school! When this assertion was made to him the Doctor became very angry, saying that Mrs.¬ÝPeacocke did not remain at the school; that, according to the arrangement as at present made, Mrs.¬ÝPeacocke had nothing to do with the school; that the house was his own, and that he might lend it to whom he pleased. Was he to turn the woman out houseless, when her husband had gone, on such an errand, on his advice? Of course the house was his own, but as clergyman of the parish he had not a right to do what he liked with it. He had no right to encourage evil. And the man was not the woman‚Äôs husband. That was just the point made by the diocese. And she was at the school‚ÅÝ‚Äîliving under the same roof with the boys! The diocese was clearly of opinion that all the boys would be taken away.</p>
			<p>The diocese spoke by the voice of its bishop, as a diocese should do. Shortly after Mr.¬ÝPeacocke‚Äôs departure, the Doctor had an interview with his lordship, and told the whole story. The doing this went much against the grain with him, but he hardly dared not to do it. He felt that he was bound to do it on the part of Mrs.¬ÝPeacocke if not on his own. And then the man, who had now gone, though he had never been absolutely a curate, had preached frequently in the diocese. He felt that it would not be wise to abstain from telling the bishop.</p>
			<p>The bishop was a goodly man, comely in his person, and possessed of manners which had made him popular in the world. He was one of those who had done the best he could with his talent, not wrapping it up in a napkin, but getting from it the best interest which the world‚Äôs market could afford. But not on that account was he other than a good man. To do the best he could for himself and his family‚ÅÝ‚Äîand also to do his duty‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas the line of conduct which he pursued. There are some who reverse this order, but he was not one of them. He had become a scholar in his youth, not from love of scholarship, but as a means to success. The Church had become his profession, and he had worked hard at his calling. He had taught himself to be courteous and urbane, because he had been clever enough to see that courtesy and urbanity are agreeable to men in high places. As a bishop he never spared himself the work which a bishop ought to do. He answered letters, he studied the characters of the clergymen under him, he was just with his patronage, he endeavoured to be efficacious with his charges, he confirmed children in cold weather as well as in warm, he occasionally preached sermons, and he was beautiful and decorous in his gait of manner, as it behoves a clergyman of the Church of England to be. He liked to be master; but even to be master he would not encounter the abominable nuisance of a quarrel. When first coming to the diocese he had had some little difficulty with our Doctor; but the Bishop had abstained from violent assertion, and they had, on the whole, been friends. There was, however, on the Bishop‚Äôs part, something of a feeling that the Doctor was the bigger man; and it was probable that, without active malignity, he would take advantage of any chance which might lower the Doctor a little, and bring him more within episcopal power. In some degree he begrudged the Doctor his manliness.</p>
			<p>He listened with many smiles and with perfect courtesy to the story as it was told to him, and was much less severe on the unfortunates than Mr.¬ÝPuddicombe had been. It was not the wickedness of the two people in living together, or their wickedness in keeping their secret, which offended him so much, as the evil which they were likely to do‚ÅÝ‚Äîand to have done. ‚ÄúNo doubt,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúan ill-living man may preach a good sermon, perhaps a better one than a pious God-fearing clergyman, whose intellect may be inferior though his morals are much better;‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut coming from tainted lips, the better sermon will not carry a blessing with it.‚Äù At this the Doctor shook his head. ‚ÄúBringing a blessing‚Äù was a phrase which the Doctor hated. He shook his head not too civilly, saying that he had not intended to trouble his lordship on so difficult a point in ecclesiastical morals. ‚ÄúBut we cannot but remember,‚Äù said the Bishop, ‚Äúthat he has been preaching in your parish church, and the people will know that he has acted among them as a clergyman.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI hope the people, my lord, may never have the Gospel preached to them by a worse man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will not judge him; but I do think that it has been a misfortune. You, of course, were in ignorance.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHad I known all about it, I should have been very much inclined to do the same.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This was, in fact, not true, and was said simply in a spirit of contradiction. The Bishop shook his head and smiled. ‚ÄúMy school is a matter of more importance,‚Äù said the Doctor.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHardly, hardly, Dr.¬ÝWortle.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf more importance in this way, that my school may probably be injured, whereas neither the morals nor the faith of the parishioners will have been hurt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut he has gone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe has gone;‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut she remains.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat!‚Äù exclaimed the Bishop.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe has gone, but she remains.‚Äù He repeated the words very distinctly, with a frown on his brow, as though to show that on that branch of the subject he intended to put up with no opposition‚ÅÝ‚Äîhardly even with an adverse opinion.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe had a certain charge, as I understand‚ÅÝ‚Äîas to the school.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe had, my lord; and very well she did her work. I shall have a great loss in her‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor the present.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you said she remained.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have lent her the use of the house till her husband shall come back.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMr.¬ÝPeacocke, you mean,‚Äù said the Bishop, who was unable not to put in a contradiction against the untruth of the word which had been used.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI shall always regard them as married.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut they are not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have lent her the house, at any rate, during his absence. I could not turn her into the street.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWould not a lodging here in the city have suited her better?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI thought not. People here would have refused to take her‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause of her story. The wife of some religious grocer, who sands his sugar regularly, would have thought her house contaminated by such an inmate.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo it would have been, Doctor, to some extent.‚Äù At hearing this the Doctor made very evident signs of discontent. ‚ÄúYou cannot alter the ways of the world suddenly, though by example and precept you may help to improve them slowly. In our present imperfect condition of moral culture, it is perhaps well that the company of the guilty should be shunned.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGuilty!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am afraid that I must say so. The knowledge that such a feeling exists no doubt deters others from guilt. The fact that wrong-doing in women is scorned helps to maintain the innocence of women. Is it not so?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI must hesitate before I trouble your lordship by arguing such difficult questions. I thought it right to tell you the facts after what had occurred. He has gone, she is there‚ÅÝ‚Äîand there she will remain for the present. I could not turn her out. Thinking her, as I do, worthy of my friendship, I could not do other than befriend her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course you must be the judge yourself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI had to be the judge, my lord.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am afraid that the parents of the boys will not understand it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI also am afraid. It will be very hard to make them understand it. There will be some who will work hard to make them misunderstand it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI hope not that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere will. I must stand the brunt of it. I have had battles before this, and had hoped that now, when I am getting old, they might have been at an end. But there is something left of me, and I can fight still. At any rate, I have made up my mind about this. There she shall remain till he comes back to fetch her.‚Äù And so the interview was over, the Bishop feeling that he had in some slight degree had the best of it‚ÅÝ‚Äîand the Doctor feeling that he, in some slight degree, had had the worst. If possible, he would not talk to the Bishop on the subject again.</p>
			<p>He told Mr.¬ÝPuddicombe also. ‚ÄúWith your generosity and kindness of heart I quite sympathise,‚Äù said Mr.¬ÝPuddicombe, endeavouring to be pleasant in his manner.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut not with my prudence.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot with your prudence,‚Äù said Mr.¬ÝPuddicombe, endeavouring to be true at the same time.</p>
			<p>But the Doctor‚Äôs greatest difficulty was with his wife, whose conduct it was necessary that he should guide, and whose feelings and conscience he was most anxious to influence. When she first heard his decision she almost wrung her hands in despair. If the woman could have gone to America, and the man have remained, she would have been satisfied. Anything wrong about a man was but of little moment‚ÅÝ‚Äîcomparatively so, even though he were a clergyman; but anything wrong about a woman‚ÅÝ‚Äîand she so near to herself! O dear! And the poor dear boys‚ÅÝ‚Äîunder the same roof with her! And the boys‚Äô mammas! How would she be able to endure the sight of that horrid Mrs.¬ÝStantiloup;‚ÅÝ‚Äîor Mrs.¬ÝStantiloup‚Äôs words, which would certainly be conveyed to her? But there was something much worse for her even than all this. The Doctor insisted that she should go and call upon the woman! ‚ÄúAnd take Mary?‚Äù asked Mrs.¬ÝWortle.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat would be the good of taking Mary? Who is talking of a child like that? It is for the sake of charity‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor the dear love of Christ, that I ask you to do it. Do you ever think of Mary Magdalene?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh yes.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis is no Magdalene. This is a woman led into no faults by vicious propensities. Here is one who has been altogether unfortunate‚ÅÝ‚Äîwho has been treated more cruelly than any of whom you have ever read.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy did she not leave him?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause she was a woman, with a heart in her bosom.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am to go to her?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do not order it. I only ask it.‚Äù Such asking from her husband was, she knew, very near alike to ordering.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat shall I say to her?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBid her keep up her courage till he shall return. If you were all alone, as she is, would not you wish that some other woman should come to comfort you? Think of her desolation.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mrs.¬ÝWortle did think of it, and after a day or two made up her mind to obey her husband‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Äîrequest. She made her call, but very little came of it, except that she promised to come again. ‚ÄúMrs.¬ÝWortle,‚Äù said the poor woman, ‚Äúpray do not let me be a trouble to you. If you stay away I shall quite understand that there is sufficient reason. I know how good your husband has been to us.‚Äù Mrs.¬ÝWortle said, however, as she took her leave, that she would come again in a day or two.</p>
			<p>But there were other troubles in store for Mrs.¬ÝWortle. Before she had repeated her visit to Mrs.¬ÝPeacocke, a lady, who lived about ten miles off, the wife of the Rector of Buttercup, called upon her. This was the Lady Margaret Momson, a daughter of the Earl of Brigstock, who had, thirty years ago, married a young clergyman. Nevertheless, up to the present day, she was quite as much the Earl‚Äôs daughter as the parson‚Äôs wife. She was first cousin to that Mrs.¬ÝStantiloup between whom and the Doctor internecine war was always being waged; and she was also aunt to a boy at the school, who, however, was in no way related to Mrs.¬ÝStantiloup, young Momson being the son of the parson‚Äôs eldest brother. Lady Margaret had never absolutely and openly taken the part of Mrs.¬ÝStantiloup. Had she done so, a visit even of ceremony would have been impossible. But she was supposed to have Stantiloup proclivities, and was not, therefore, much liked at Bowick. There had been a question indeed whether young Momson should be received at the school‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause of the <i>quasi</i> connection with the arch-enemy; but Squire Momson of Buttercup, the boy‚Äôs father, had set that at rest by bursting out, in the Doctor‚Äôs hearing, into violent abuse against ‚Äúthe close-fisted, vulgar old faggot.‚Äù The son of a man imbued with such proper feelings was, of course, accepted.</p>
			<p>But Lady Margaret was proud‚ÅÝ‚Äîespecially at the present time. ‚ÄúWhat a romance this is, Mrs.¬ÝWortle,‚Äù she said, ‚Äúthat has gone all through the diocese!‚Äù The reader will remember that Lady Margaret was also the wife of a clergyman.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou mean‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Peacockes?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course I do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe has gone away.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe all know that, of course;‚ÅÝ‚Äîto look for his wife‚Äôs husband. Good gracious me! What a story!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey think that he is‚ÅÝ‚Äîdead now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose they thought so before,‚Äù said Lady Margaret.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course they did.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThough it does seem that no inquiry was made at all. Perhaps they don‚Äôt care about those things over there as we do here. He couldn‚Äôt have cared very much‚ÅÝ‚Äînor she.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Doctor thinks that they are very much to be pitied.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Doctor always was a little Quixotic‚ÅÝ‚Äîeh?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think that at all, Lady Margaret.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI mean in the way of being so very good-natured and kind. Her brother came;‚ÅÝ‚Äîdidn‚Äôt he?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHer first husband‚Äôs brother,‚Äù said Mrs.¬ÝWortle, blushing.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHer first husband!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell;‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou know what I mean, Lady Margaret.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes; I know what you mean. It is so very shocking; isn‚Äôt it? And so the two men have gone off together to look for the third. Goodness me;‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat a party they will be if they meet! Do you think they‚Äôll quarrel?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know, Lady Margaret.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd that he should be a clergyman of the Church of England! Isn‚Äôt it dreadful? What does the Bishop say? Has he heard all about it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Bishop has nothing to do with it. Mr.¬ÝPeacocke never held a curacy in the diocese.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut he has preached here very often‚ÅÝ‚Äîand has taken her to church with him! I suppose the Bishop has been told?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou may be sure that he knows it as well as you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe are so anxious, you know, about dear little Gus.‚Äù Dear little Gus was Augustus Momson, the lady‚Äôs nephew, who was supposed to be the worst-behaved, and certainly the stupidest boy in the school.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAugustus will not be hurt, I should say.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPerhaps not directly. But my sister has, I know, very strong opinions on such subjects. Now, I want to ask you one thing. Is it true that‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe‚ÅÝ‚Äîremains here?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe is still living in the school-house.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs that prudent, Mrs.¬ÝWortle?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you want to have an opinion on that subject, Lady Margaret, I would recommend you to ask the Doctor.‚Äù By which she meant to assert that Lady Margaret would not, for the life of her, dare to ask the Doctor such a question. ‚ÄúHe has done what he has thought best.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMost good-natured, you mean, Mrs.¬ÝWortle.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI mean what I say, Lady Margaret. He has done what he has thought best, looking at all the circumstances. He thinks that they are very worthy people, and that they have been most cruelly ill-used. He has taken that into consideration. You call it good-nature. Others perhaps may call it‚ÅÝ‚Äîcharity.‚Äù The wife, though she at her heart deplored her husband‚Äôs action in the matter, was not going to own to another lady that he had been imprudent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am sure I hope they will,‚Äù said Lady Margaret. Then as she was taking her leave, she made a suggestion. ‚ÄúSome of the boys will be taken away, I suppose. The Doctor probably expects that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know what he expects,‚Äù said Mrs.¬ÝWortle. ‚ÄúSome are always going, and when they go, others come in their places. As for me, I wish he would give the school up altogether.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPerhaps he means it,‚Äù said Lady Margaret; ‚Äúotherwise, perhaps he wouldn‚Äôt have been so good-natured.‚Äù Then she took her departure.</p>
			<p>When her visitor was gone Mrs.¬ÝWortle was very unhappy. She had been betrayed by her wrath into expressing that wish as to the giving up of the school. She knew well that the Doctor had no such intention. She herself had more than once suggested it in her timid way, but the Doctor had treated her suggestions as being worth nothing. He had his ideas about Mary, who was undoubtedly a very pretty girl. Mary might marry well, and ¬£20,000 would probably assist her in doing so.</p>
			<p>When he was told of Lady Margaret‚Äôs hints, he said in his wrath that he would send young Momson away instantly if a word was said to him by the boy‚Äôs mamma. ‚ÄúOf course,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúif the lad turns out a scapegrace, as is like enough, it will be because Mrs.¬ÝPeacocke had two husbands. It is often a question to me whether the religion of the world is not more odious than its want of religion.‚Äù To this terrible suggestion poor Mrs.¬ÝWortle did not dare to make any answer whatever.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
